hi guys I'm Laura Vitale and on this
episode of Laura in the kitchen I want
to show you how many potato gratin now
this is a really simple basic recipe
that I feel like everyone should have in
the recipe box just because it's
delicious it's easy it's a crowd-pleaser
and especially at the holiday table you
know you need a good potato dish for
Thanksgiving so this is definitely one
that you can make and people would love
now it's let me take you over the
ingredients so you can get started
you'll need some potatoes I'm using
Yukon Gold I did my best to peel them
properly but obviously I don't care much
you'll need a whole milk heavy cream
some nutmeg butter flour I've got some
fresh sage thyme and garlic a little
salt and pepper and you'll also need
some Gruyere cheese which we'll get to
at the end and the first thing you want
to is video I haven't preheated of
course to 400 get that out of the way
now I'm going to get a saucepan and then
my saucepan I'm going to put in my
butter and I'm going to wait for that to
melt because I'm going to make a quick
route just to make sure that we have a
really creamy and velvety sauce
to cover our potatoes in the meantime
I've got a little pad of butter here in
my dish I'm just let pop this into the
microwave just to melt the butter so
that the bottom of the dish is nice and
buttered and it's gonna be the perfect
bed for the potatoes I'm add in the
flour and just mix that and cook it for
just about a minute you want to get rid
of that raw garlic not raw garlic you
tel have garlic on my mind 24/7 raw
flour taste that's looking good now I'm
going to add my milk
I'm going to add in my heavy cream this
is indulging dish but I have to be
honest it's really delicious I'm going
to then add a sprig a couple sprigs of
thyme then I'm gonna chop it along with
my sage and my garlic and I'm going to
put in a little thyme bit of nutmeg I
love a touch of nutmeg with my white
sauce and you just want to make sure you
put a little bit in and not a lot
because it can go from sort of delicious
and but sort of something special in the
background to really overpowering and
it's going to taste like it should be in
dessert when the dense season with salt
and pepper my mother would have a fit
because she uses always uses white
pepper in her cream sauce I was born to
be a rebel so I'm going to use black
pepper because I prefer a black pepper a
little bit of salt
I'm gonna let this go together over
about medium-low heat for about I don't
know five six minutes or until the sauce
thickens and that's going to toast herbs
and the garlic is going to really
perfume that sauce beautifully in the
meantime I got my baking pan my baking
dish here coated with the butter and I'm
just going to take my potato so you can
do this on a mandolin but the mandolin
is really dangerous in my opinion so I
hardly ever use it and I'm just going to
slice these about eighth of an inch
thick just use my knife that's thickened
up quite a bit so I'm going to turn that
off I've already put one layer of
potatoes in my baking dish because what
I'm gonna do first of all I'm going to
fish out the sage and thyme just because
I feel like it's already done its job
it'll really need it to do anything else
I just want to infuse those flavors into
my cream and milk mixture just a little
bit if I can find it a piece of garlic
it's going to be a surprise for someone
pour half of this creamy sauce over the
top and then it doesn't have to be
perfect it's all going to melt together
and be gorgeous and then put another
layer of your potatoes on top oh that
looks amazing let me take my wood spoon
and get every little bit of that cream
out of there you can really really smell
the herbs too and they were only in
there for a few minutes but they heat
kind of really helped get those lovely
rumors out
Oh fabulous okay now I'm going to cover
this with some aluminum foil I'm going
to pop this into the oven at 400 for
about 45 minutes it needs to be in there
for quite a bit because those potatoes
need to cook and once everything starts
to cook together once you top it with
shredded cheese it all makes sense
you're just going to have to trust me on
this so cover this up and I pop it into
the oven look at that look at that
now these as you can see the potatoes
are fully cooked now what I'm going to
do is I'm going to uncover it
I'm going to cover the top with some
shredded Gruyere and you could use
cheddar you could use whatever cheese
you want but I love Gruyere because it's
that lovely nutty flavors that I
absolutely adore and I also feel like it
is a stronger cheese so I don't need to
use a lot of it and on top of that I
feel like by using three year instead of
cheddar makes this a little bit more
special perfect for the holidays
all right back into the oven at this
point it just needs to be in there for
about 15 minutes or so or until the top
is golden brown and then I'm gonna let
this cool just a bit before we serve it
you should smell this right now because
you can really smell the sage and thyme
and garlic it's delicious
definitely worthy of being on your
holiday table this year and our chatting
into the oven once I put the cheese back
on this in the oven for 15 minutes I let
it cool pretty much completely because
as soon as it came out it was bubbling
and so make me a little bit nervous now
it's time to dig in alright now this is
very rich so when I tell you you should
be able to get a good eight portions out
of this as a side dish I really mean
that because it is so rich because the
cheese is so delicious and flavorful
really I don't think you need a portion
any bigger than this I know some you can
probably even stretch it out to feed
about ten people or so because of that
factor because we used a really good
flavorful cheese
a little goes a long way and flavor-wise
it does the job beautifully it is so
creamy and delicious I like melt mmm
this is fantastic and this is the thing
Jim I know it's the season of indulging
and totally here yeah but go ahead and
try to get a little bites of here and
there instead of piling you plate up
with a ton of things because you don't
really get to enjoy everything on your
plate as much as you should if you do it
that way mmm not as delicious right
screaming and velvety you can trace the
garlic and herbs mmm it's nutty from the
cheese on top it's pretty much the best
potato gratin you will put your lips
around I guarantee you will are in the
kitchen have come to get this recipe I
hope you enjoy spending time with me
next time
you